# 2011

### Overview

The “radio protocol” refers to the suite of protocols used to move data from the host computer to a robot or vice versa. This includes other protocols than simply those that actually travel by radio \(for instance, the USB protocol between the host computer and the radio dongle\). In fact, there may not even be a radio component \(such as if a robot is plugged directly into a USB port for testing\). For convenience, all these parts fall under the general umbrella “radio protocol”.

### The Universe

The model of the universe within the radio protocol is to provide communication between exactly one host computer and between zero and sixteen robots, identified by numerical indices from 0 to 15. Other models \(such as the use of multiple host computers\) can be achieved by creating multiple universes, but those universes do not interact with each other and are thus uninteresting. For example, running two robots via direct USB cable from two computers would constitute two universes, as would running two fleets of robots by radio from two separate hosts using distinct radio channel pairs.

Within a universe, data travels from the host computer to a robot or from a robot to the host. Data does not travel directly from one robot to another. Within these documents, the term out refers to data travelling from host to robot, while the term in refers to data travelling from robot to host. The host can communicate with up to sixteen robots by time-sharing the spectrum among them.

Between the host and a single robot, there exist sixteen logical pipes, numbered 0 through 15, each of which carries application-layer data in one direction \(in or out\). Each pipe carries a distinct type of data, does so in a distinct way, and has a particular priority. The data carried on each pipe is logically independent of the data carried on the other pipes, and data sent on different pipes may potentially be reordered before being delivered.

### Pipe Types

Pipe types define how data is transported without defining the format of the data. The properties of each pipe type are defined below, but the implementation of individual pipe types is deferred to the transport layer documents since each pipe type is implemented differently in each transport layer.

#### **The State Transport Pipe Type**

A state transport pipe is suitable for transporting data that:

* requires low latency,
* is idempotent \(repetition of delivery is irrelevant\), and
* is loss-tolerant \(loss of data is acceptable; new packets completely override and make irrelevant old packets\)

A state transport pipe could be considered a model of a shared memory region, where updates by the sender are propagated to the recipient as quickly as possible but there is no guarantee that the recipient will see any particular update and there is no concept of an atomic “message” whose delivery is flagged. However, freshness of a state transport pipe can be determined on a hop-by-hop basis \(that is, it is possible for a recipient to specify a timeout value and determine whether the sender is alive or dead\).

A typical use of a state transport pipe would be to carry wheel speed set points: these need to be delivered quickly, but delivering the same set point twice causes no ill effects \(indeed it does nothing at all\), and failing to deliver a particular set point value is reasonably harmless since a later set point value would have completely replaced the lost value anyway.

#### **The Message Pipe Type**

An message pipe is suitable for transporting data that:

* requires guaranteed once-and-only-once delivery,
* occurs relatively infrequently, and
* requires high bandwidth and/or low latency

An message pipe is much like a regular network socket which reliably carries messages to their destination as quickly as possible.

A typical use of a message pipe would be to carry kick power levels: these need to be delivered quickly, must be delivered \(or else the robot will fail to kick\), and must be delivered only once \(or else the robot will try to kick twice and waste power\), but occur relatively infrequently as robots do not kick very often compared to other activity such as driving.

Another typical use of a message pipe would be to carry new firmware: this must be delivered reliably and is a very large amount of data \(potentially multiple megabytes\), and hence requires high bandwidth.

Messages may have payloads of up to 63 bytes.

### The Pipes

Individual pipes each have a pipe type and direction as well as a particular format of application-layer data carried within the pipe. Indicating a pipe number fully identifies what kind of application data is being transported. The following pipes are defined:

| Pipe Number | Pipe Type | Direction | Name |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| 0 | State Transfer | Out | Drive |
| 1 | State Transfer | In | Feedback |
| 2 | Message | Out | Kick |
| 3 | Message | Out | Firmware |
| 4 | Message | In | Firmware |
| 5 | Message | Out | Test Mode |
| 6 | Message | In | Autokick Indicator or Experiment Data |

All other pipe numbers are reserved for future use.

All multi-byte quantities defined in the pipe format tables are transmitted in little endian format.

#### **The Drive Pipe**

The drive pipe carries information from the host to the robot to drive and enable or disable subsystems in the following format:

| Bit Offset | Length | Data |
| :--- | :--- | :--- |
| 0 | 1 | 0 = brake motors, 1 = run motors |
| 1 | 1 | 0 = capacitor charger off, 1 = capacitor charger on |
| 2 | 1 | 0 = dribbler off, 1 = dribbler on |
| 3 | 1 | Auto-kick mask flag 1 \(see Kick Pipe below\) |
| 4 | 1 | Auto-kick mask flag 2 \(see Kick Pipe below\) |
| 5 | 1 | Auto-kick armed |
| 6 | 2 | Reserved |
| 8 | 11 | A number from −1023 to 1023 representing the speed at which wheel 1 should turn, in quarters of a degree per five milliseconds |
| 19 | 11 | A number from −1023 to 1023 representing the speed at which wheel 2 should turn, in quarters of a degree per five milliseconds |
| 30 | 11 | A number from −1023 to 1023 representing the speed at which wheel 3 should turn, in quarters of a degree per five milliseconds |
| 41 | 11 | A number from −1023 to 1023 representing the speed at which wheel 4 should turn, in quarters of a degree per five milliseconds |
| 52 | 3 | A test class code |
| 55 | 3 | A test target index |
| 58 | 7 | Auto-kick t1 \(see Kick Pipe below\) |
| 65 | 7 | Auto-kick t2 \(see Kick Pipe below\) |
| 72 | 7 | Auto-kick Δt \(see Kick Pipe below\) |

Note that it is not necessary to explicitly disable the capacitor charger when the capacitor voltage reaches its maximum value, as the charger will automatically go into a regulation mode at that time. It is also not necessary to explicitly disable the capacitor charger before kicking or chipping, as the system will temporarily disable the charger during capacitor discharge and initiate a new charge cycle once the discharge is complete.

The following test classes are defined:

| Class | Meaning |
| :--- | :--- |
| 0 | No test mode |
| 1 | Lamp test, all four FPGA LEDs on |
| 2 | Hall test, outputs polarities of Hall sensors for motor n \(1–4=wheel, 5=dribbler\) on LEDs |
| 3 | Encoder test, outputs polarities of optical encoder lines for wheel _n_ \(1–4\) |
| 4 | Encoder count test, outputs encoder count for wheel _n_ \(1–4\) |
| 5 | Charger test, outputs individual charge pulses on LED0, timeout flag on LED1 |
| others | undefined |

If all three numerical auto-kick parameters are set to zero, auto-kick is disarmed. Otherwise, when the ball is detected in the beam sensor, the robot will automatically kick with the parameters in the state transport packet as though a kick message with the same data had been received.

#### **The Feedback Pipe**

The feedback pipe carries information from the robot about the state of its subsystems in the following format:

| Byte Offset | Length | Data |
| :--- | :--- | :--- |
| 0 | 1 | Flags: Bit 0: 0 = no feedback yet, 1 = feedback valid, Bit 1: 0 = no ball, 1 = ball in break beam sensor , Bit 2: 0 = no ball, 1 = ball loading dribbler motor \(currently unimplemented\) , Bit 3: 0 = capacitors not charged, 1 = capacitors charged |
| 1 | 2 | A number from 0 to 1023 representing the raw analogue-to-digital converter reading of the battery voltage |
| 3 | 2 | A number from 0 to 4095 representing the raw analogue-to-digital converter reading of the capacitor voltage |
| 5 | 2 | A number from 0 to 1023 representing the raw analogue-to-digital converter reading of the dribbler thermistor |
| 7 | 2 | A number from 0 to 1023 representing the raw analogue-to-digital converter reading of the light sensor voltage |

### The Kick Pipe

The kick pipe carries commands from the host to the robot to activate the kicker or chipper and kick or chip the ball. The robot will attempt to kick or chip once for each message transferred on this pipe. Messages have the following format:

| Byte Offset | Length | Data |
| :--- | :--- | :--- |
| 0 | 1 | Bits 0–6: Time t1 \(in units of 32µs\), Bit 7: Mask flag 1 |
| 1 | 1 | Bits 0–6: Time t2 \(in units of 32µs\), Bit 7: Mask flag 2 |
| 2 | 1 | Bits 0–6: Time Δt \(in units of 32µs\), Bit 7: Reserved |

A single kick message can cause the generation of pulses on one solenoid or on both solenoids. If both solenoids are to be activated, the pulses can be the same length or different lengths, and can start at the same time or at different times.

For each solenoid k \(1 or 2\), a \(possibly zero-length\) pulse will be generated whose falling edge appears at time tk. If mask flag k is 1, the pulse's rising edge will appear at time 0. If mask flag k is 0, the pulse's rising edge will appear at time Δt. Thus, changing tk changes the pulse width of one pulse by moving the falling edge, while changing Δt allows an offset to be introduced between the rising edges of the two pulses by delaying the rising edge of the pulse to whichever solenoid's mask flag is clear.

#### **The Test Mode Pipe**

The test mode pipe carries commands from the host to the robot to display certain debugging information on the robot's on-board LEDs. The robot displays a particular test pattern until rebooted or until another message is received on this pipe. Messages have the following format:

| Byte Offset | Length | Data |
| :--- | :--- | :--- |
| 0 | 1 | Test Class |
| 1 | 1 | Test Index |

The Test Class is the general type of testing being carried out \(for example, hall sensors or optical encoders\). The Test Index identifies a specific instance within the class \(for example, wheel 3\). The list of valid test classes is defined by the VHDL.

#### **The Autokick Indicator Pipe**

The autokick indicator pipe carries a message from the robot to the host each time the autokick capability fires the kicker. The message has no payload.

#### **The Experiment Data Pipe**

The experiment data pipe carries collected data from a robot in scripted-experiment to the host after the experiment has concluded. Messages have the following format:

| Byte Offset | Length | Data |
| :--- | :--- | :--- |
| 0 | 1 | Offset within 256-byte data buffer at which first byte of current packet's data was found |
| 1 | 32 | 32 bytes from the 256-byte data buffer |

#### **The Firmware Pipes**

The firmware pipes are used to examine the firmware installed in the robot, upload new firmware for either the microcontroller or the FPGA, or read or write on-board non-volatile tuning parameters. Firmware operations are generally executed in a request-response style, with each message on the outbound pipe provoking either zero or one messages on the inbound pipe. For those messages that provoke responses, the host is not permitted to send a second firmware message to the same robot until a response has been received to the first message.

**The Operational Parameters Block**

The operational parameters block is a block of data controlling overall operation of the robot. The operational parameters block lives in non-volatile storage in the PIC's on-board flash. At system boot, the block is shadowed into volatile storage in the PIC's RAM; this volatile shadow is referenced for further operations. For efficiency and to avoid over-stressing the flash while tuning parameters, modifications to the operational parameters block are applied only to the volatile shadow. Once tuning is complete and proper values have been determined, the shadow can be committed to non-volatile storage. Because any system reboot will result in the shadow being discarded, it is essential that any changes that must survive across a reboot be committed before the reboot is initiated.

The operational parameters block has the following format:

| Byte Offset | Length | Data |
| :--- | :--- | :--- |
| 0 | 1 | SPI flash contents: 0 = FPGA bitstream, 1 = PIC firmware, other = No data \(set automatically on completion of PIC rewrite\) |
| 1 | 1 | XBee 0 radio channel: 0 = Unconfigured , 0x0B–0x1A = Radio channel |
| 2 | 1 | XBee 1 radio channel: 0 = Unconfigured, 0x0B–0x1A = Radio channel |
| 3 | 1 | Robot number |
| 4 | 1 | PWM duty cycle to apply to dribbler when activated |

On system boot, if the operational parameters block's SPI Flash Contents field indicates PIC Firmware, the firmware will automatically jump to a bootloader stub which will read the new firmware from the SPI flash and write it to the PIC's internal flash. Once the upgrade is complete, the bootloader stub will change the SPI Flash Contents field to No Data before rebooting the system a second time into the new firmware.

**SPI Chip Erase**

Request:

| Byte Offset | Length | Data |
| :--- | :--- | :--- |
| 0 | 1 | Always 0 |

Response:

| Byte Offset | Length | Data |
| :--- | :--- | :--- |
| 0 | 1 | Always 0 |

The SPI Chip Erase command erases the SPI flash memory chip \(flash must be erased before writing new data\). The erase begins when the request is received; when the erase finishes, the response is sent.

**SPI Fill Page Buffer**

Request:

| Byte Offset | Length | Data |
| :--- | :--- | :--- |
| 0 | 1 | Always 1 |
| 1 | 1 | Offset \(0 to 255\) in buffer at which to write data |
| 2 | _n_ | Data |

The SPI Fill Page Buffer command fills a byte interval in the page buffer in preparation for programming a page.

**SPI Page Program**

Request:

| Byte Offset | Length | Data |
| :--- | :--- | :--- |
| 0 | 1 | Always 2 |
| 1 | 2 | Bits 8 through 23 of address of first byte in page |
| 3 | 2 | CRC16 of page data |

Response:

| Byte Offset | Length | Data |
| :--- | :--- | :--- |
| 0 | 1 | Always 2 |

The SPI Page Program command burns the contents of the page buffer to the SPI flash, after verifying that the CRC of the page buffer is correct.

**SPI Compute Block CRC**

Request:

| Byte Offset | Length | Data |
| :--- | :--- | :--- |
| 0 | 1 | Always 3 |
| 1 | 3 | Address of first byte in block |
| 4 | 2 | Number of bytes in block \(0=64kB\) |

Response:

| Byte Offset | Length | Data |
| :--- | :--- | :--- |
| 0 | 1 | Always 3 |
| 1 | 3 | Address of first byte in block |
| 4 | 2 | Number of bytes in block \(0=64kB\) |
| 6 | 2 | CRC16 of block |

The SPI Compute Block CRC command computes the CRC16 of a block of between 1 and 65,536 bytes starting at an arbitrary address.

**Read Operational Parameters Block**

Request:

| Byte Offset | Length | Data |
| :--- | :--- | :--- |
| 0 | 1 | Always 4 |

Response:

| Byte Offset | Length | Data |
| :--- | :--- | :--- |
| 0 | 1 | Always 4 |
| 1 | _n_ | Contents of volatile shadow of operational parameters block |

The Read Operational Parameters Block command returns the contents of the operational parameters block.

**Set Operational Parameters Block**

Request:

| Byte Offset | Length | Data |
| :--- | :--- | :--- |
| 0 | 1 | Always 5 |
| 1    _n_ | Contents of volatile operational parameters block |  |

Response:

| Byte Offset | Length | Data |
| :--- | :--- | :--- |
| 0 | 1 | Always 5 |

The Set Operational Parameters Block command writes values into the volatile shadow of the operational parameters block.

**Commit Operational Parameters Block**

Request:

| Byte Offset | Length | Data |
| :--- | :--- | :--- |
| 0 | 1 | Always 7 |

Response:

| Byte Offset | Length | Data |
| :--- | :--- | :--- |
| 0 | 1 | Always 7 |

The Commit Operational Parameters Block command writes the current contents of the volatile shadow of the operational parameters block into the SPI flash.

**Reboot**

Request:

| Byte Offset | Length | Data |
| :--- | :--- | :--- |
| 0 | 1 | Always 8 |

Response:

| Byte Offset | Length | Data |
| :--- | :--- | :--- |
| 0 | 1 | Always 8 |

The Reboot command reboots the microcontroller, resetting the FPGA and XBees as a side-effect. The reboot occurs after the response packet has been delivered to the host.

**Read Build Signatures**

Request:

| Byte Offset | Length | Data |
| :--- | :--- | :--- |
| 0 | 1 | Always 9 |

Response:

| Byte Offset | Length | Data |
| :--- | :--- | :--- |
| 0 | 1 | Always 9 |
| 1 | 2 | CRC16 of microcontroller firmware, addresses 0 through 0x1EFFF |
| 3 | 2 | CRC16 of SPI flash contents |

The Read Build Signature command returns the CRCs of the microcontroller firmware and SPI flash, allowing comparing them to compiled hex files.

#### **Fault codes**

The defined fault codes are:

| Code | Meaning |
| :--- | :--- |
| 0 | Capacitor charge timeout |
| 1 | Chicker board communication error |
| 2 | Chicker board not present |
| 3 | FPGA DCM lock failed |
| 4 | FPGA online fabric CRC failed |
| 5 | FPGA communication error |
| 6 | FPGA no bitstream available |
| 7 | FPGA configuration failed |
| 8 | Oscillator stopped |
| 9 + _n_, 0 ≤ _n_ ≤ 4 | Motor n+1 Hall sense 000 |
| 14 + _n_, 0 ≤ _n_ ≤ 4 | Motor n+1 Hall sense 111 |
| 19 + _n_, 0 ≤ _n_ ≤ 3 | Motor n+1 Hall sensors stuck with respect to encoders |
| 23 + _n_, 0 ≤ _n_ ≤ 3 | Motor n+1 optical encoders stuck with respect to Hall sensors |
| 27 | Dribbler overheating |
| 28 | Dribbler thermistor reading out of range |
| 29 | Radio protocol error |
| 30 | XBee 0 serial framing error |
| 31 | XBee 1 serial framing error |
| 32 | XBee 0 hardware overrun error |
| 33 | XBee 1 hardware overrun error |
| 34 | XBee 0 software overrun error |
| 35 | XBee 1 software overrun error |
| 36 | XBee 0 receive checksum error |
| 37 | XBee 1 receive checksum error |
| 38 | XBee 0 nonzero received packet length MSB |
| 39 | XBee 1 nonzero received packet length MSB |
| 40 | XBee 0 illegal received packet length LSB |
| 41 | XBee 1 illegal received packet length LSB |
| 42 | XBee 0 timeout waiting for local modem response |
| 43 | XBee 1 timeout waiting for local modem response |
| 44 | Dongle sent state transport micropacket with incorrect length |
| 45 | Dongle sent message to nonexistent pipe |
| 46 | SPI flash communication error |
| 47 | Operational parameters block absent or corrupt |

but error reporting is not implemented yet

### The Transports

The pipes described above are carried over three types of transports.

When a host computer is using a radio dongle, a single application can communicate with up to fifteen robots at a time. The pipes cover two hops: the Dongle Protocol moves data between the host computer and the radio dongle over a USB cable, and the XBee Protocol moves data between the radio dongle and the robots by radio.

When a host computer is using a direct cable connection to a robot, a single application can communicate with only one robot at a time. The pipes cover only a single hop: the Dongle Protocol is used with some minor variation \(described on that page\).

